Final Essay

Introductory Statement

Childhood trauma casts a long shadow, that leaves scars on an adult's mental. In this research topic titled: "Unveiling the Hidden Wounds: Delving into the Profound Impact of Childhood Trauma on Adult Mental Health", there is a need to embark on this journey to unravel the intricate connections between early-life adversities and the enduring afflictions of childhood trauma on one's mental health as an adult. Through a comprehensive analysis of selected articles, the aim is to illuminate the multi-faceted landscape of childhood trauma, delving beyond the surface to reveal the profound implications for mental well-being in adulthood. 
The informal discussions and reflexive self-reflection added a qualitative dimension to the research, revealing persistent issues such as fear, trust difficulties, and low self-worth among those affected by childhood trauma. Participants also shared coping mechanisms, including seeking therapy, engaging in creative outlets, and relying on social support networks, which emphasize the importance of professional support and strong personal relationships in mitigating the effects of trauma. This essay will further navigate and elaborate on how childhood trauma can immensely affect an individual as an adult and how that impacts their mental health.

Literature Review

Mental well-being as an adult is crucial as it affects our daily decision-making process and behaviour towards others. Delving into understanding trauma more, it is best understood as a "relational phrase", a notion that interconnects an external event to an internal psychological reality by Negele et al. (2015). A psychological reality check of the bonds one forms with people in their environment plays a massive part in the transition from childhood to adulthood. Perry (2001) states these bonds are essential for survival and well-being. It is a significant interaction and the bonds we form with our family, friends, and loved ones. This emotional connectivity is like a kind of “glue” called love. However, not all individuals get to experience these bonds. This is because our brain functions with the type of people and company that helps one develop from infancy to early childhood. It is a crucial period that shapes a healthy relationship with people later in life. This is why the article “Bonding and Attachment in Maltreated Children” is chosen, as it delves into the profound impact of childhood trauma on adult mental health. The experiences are explored on the insight of the effects on one’s early life afflicted by emotional neglect and maltreatment, and how this affects a person’s ability to form healthy emotional relationships. This, in turn, can have lasting repercussions on one’s mental well-being as an adult.

According to Nemeroff (2004), the mental effects of an adult succinctly outline how childhood adversities, such as abuse and parental loss increase the link between genetic vulnerability and early traumatic experiences. This provides insight into the neurobiological mechanisms underlying these effects, which is crucial for understanding the long-term impact of childhood trauma on mental health. Nemeroff elaborates on this, that long-term childhood impact that an individual experiencing adversity in their early-life events, can significantly impact one's developing brain. The lifelong psychological consequences might result from neurobiological alternations brought by unfavourable early-life stress. A child's subsequent development of anxiety and depression disorders is more from an experience with parental loss, and sexual and physical abuse. Constant stress in a young child's life for one's brain to develop maturely can impact the decision and mental health of the person transitioning into adulthood.

In regards to this, chronic illness such as depression has a long-term effect on an individual in adulthood. This is determined by the research of Mock and Arai (2011), who stated that a child experiencing traumatic events will have consequential health issues in adulthood of a development in chronic illness such as depression. Various trauma events like abuse, prolonged hospitalization, and family instability are linked to poor immune and cardiovascular health. The life course perspective elaborates on cumulative disadvantage from childhood trauma, highlighting mental health as a critical pathway. Trauma increases the risk of psychological distress and disorders, leading to negative health outcomes in adulthood. This has led to socioeconomic disadvantages, such as lower educational and occupational attainment, and worsened health issues. poor mental health and low socioeconomic status perpetuate chronic illness, emphasizing the profound impact of childhood trauma on adult well-being and the importance of addressing these factors as potential buffers.

Furthermore, Snell et al. (2016), determined that childhood experiences in natural environments cultivate emotional regulation strategies that persist into adulthood, potentially offering resilience against the impact of childhood trauma on adult mental health. This connection underscores the significance of early environment influences on later psychological well-being, with implications for understanding and addressing the hidden wounds of childhood trauma in adult mental health. This immensely causes a change in an individual's identity is shaped due to the traumatic events one has gone through according to Truskauskaite-Kuneviciene et al. (2020). The research was that childhood trauma can have a profound impact on an individual's identity development, leading to difficulties in forming a coherent and positive sense of self. Trauma can disrupt the normal process of identity formation, causing individuals to struggle with exploring their sense of purpose, making commitments, and how they make decisions. This can lead to a diffused or ambiguous identity, that influences the transition from childhood to adult, characterizing an identity crisis and mental trauma.  Faravelli et al. (2014) stated that various types of childhood trauma impact an individual in one's adulthood. This includes neglect, abuse, and loss that are associated with distinct symptom patterns in adulthood. The study's findings support the idea that chronic illness of depression, for instance, can be caused by the cumulative effects of childhood trauma, which can lead to a range of symptoms and difficulties in adulthood, including anxiety, depression, and substance abuse. Recognizing these types of childhood trauma can develop targeted and effective interventions to address the profound impact of childhood trauma on adult mental health.

According to Kaptein et al. (2022), there are three components to reduce challenging behaviours in children who have experienced trauma before their transition into adulthood. Attachment focuses on building a strong and secure bond between the child and their caregiver or the individuals who influenced the life of the child; regulation involves teaching children how to manage their emotions and behaviours; and competency to build the child's sense of self-worth and confidence in a supportive environment that helps a child develop the skills on can thrive in and being emotionally regulated, social skills and positivity. Rumsey and Milsom (2018) stated that schools can also play a massive part in a child's life by recognizing the trauma and providing counselling and assistance. Trauma-informed school counselling is a crucial approach in supporting school engagement for students who have experienced trauma. This is one of the ways to curb mental health issues as an adult that a child receives proper counselling and succeeds academically to eradicate the stigma that those with a traumatic childhood will not be able to thrive in life.

Critically, despite the growing recognition of the importance of trauma-informed counselling, concerns are raised about the approach of lack of empirical evidence to support the effectiveness of trauma-informed schools as a great strategy to curb mental health issues as an adult from one's childhood. The literature review on mental well-being and childhood trauma has several flaws and limitations. The review lacks coherence and structure, overreliance on secondary sources, and a limited scope that focuses only on childhood trauma's effects on adult mental health without considering broader social and systemic factors. Additionally, the review lacks a critical evaluation of the research studies cited, failing to provide an in-depth analysis of the strengths and limitations of each study, and has an overemphasis on individual-level factors such as childhood trauma and attachment. The review also lacks a clear methodology and criteria for selecting studies, relies too heavily on anecdotal evidence, and fails to consider the cultural sensitivity and diversity of the research studies cited, making it difficult to assess the validity and reliability of the findings.



References

Faravelli, C., Castellini, G., Fioravanti, G., Lo Sauro, C., Pietrini, F., Lelli, L., Rotella, F., & Ricca, V. (2014). Different Childhood Adversities Are Associated with Different Symptom Patterns in Adulthood. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 83(5), 320–321. https://doi.org/10.1159/000363111

Kaptein, F., Kiefer, B., Cully, A., Celiktutan, O., Bierman, B., Rijgersberg-peters, R., Broekens, J., Van Vught, W., Van Bekkum, M., Demiris, Y., & Neerincx, M. A. (2022). A Cloud-based Robot System for Long-term Interaction: Principles, Implementation, Lessons Learned. ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction, 11(1), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/3481585

Mock, S. E., & Arai, S. M. (2011). Childhood Trauma and Chronic Illness in Adulthood: Mental Health and Socioeconomic Status as Explanatory Factors and Buffers. Frontiers in Psychology, 1(246). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00246

Negele, A., Kaufhold, J., Kallenbach, L., & Leuzinger-Bohleber, M. (2015). Childhood Trauma and Its Relation to Chronic Depression in Adulthood. Depression Research and Treatment, 2015(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/650804

Nemeroff, C. (2004). Neurobiological Consequences of Childhood Trauma. J Clin Psychiatry, 65(1). https://www.psychiatrist.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/15380_neurobiological-consequences-childhood-trauma.pdf

Perry, B. (2001). Bonding and Attachment in Maltreated Children Consequences of Emotional Neglect in Childhood. https://fosteringandadoption.rip.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/bonding-and-attachment-in-maltreated-children.pdf

Rumsey, A. D., & Milsom, A. (2018). Supporting School Engagement and High School Completion Through Trauma-Informed School Counseling. Professional School Counseling, 22(1), 2156759X1986725. https://doi.org/10.1177/2156759x19867254

Snell, T. L., Lam, J. C. S., Lau, W. W.-Y., Lee, I., Maloney, E. M., Mulholland, N., Wilson, L., & Wynne, L. J. (2016). Contact with Nature in Childhood and Adult Depression. Children, Youth and Environments, 26(1), 111. https://doi.org/10.7721/chilyoutenvi.26.1.0111

Truskauskaite-Kuneviciene, I., Brailovskaia, J., Kamite, Y., Petrauskaite, G., Margraf, J., & Kazlauskas, E. (2020). Does Trauma Shape Identity? Exploring the Links Between Lifetime Trauma Exposure and Identity Status in Emerging Adulthood. Frontiers in Psychology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.570644
